Computer Network Assignment




1.  What is the major difference between the http and https protocol?
        
        
        
Feature
	HTTP (HyperText Transfer Protocol)
	HTTPS (HyperText Transfer Protocol Secure)
	Security 
	Data is sent in plain text.
	Data is encrypted (scrambled).
	Port
	Uses Port 80
	Uses Port 443.
	Vulnerable attacks
	High (Man-in -the-Middle (MITM), sniffing)
	Very low, Protects against eavesdropping
	Trust
	No identity verification
	Requires an SSL/TLS Certificate
	SEO
	No SEO benefit
	Google gives higher rankings to HTTPS sites.
	Data Integrity 
	Data can be modified 
	Data cannot be tampered
	Usecase
	Testing, internal networks
	Public websites, login, payments
	        




2. What are the layers where this http and https protocols work?
HTTP and HTTPS operate at the Application Layer (Layer 7) of the OSI model and use TCP at the Transport Layer.


3. Describe the osi model of data flow?
In the OSI model, data flows from the Application layer down to the Physical layer during transmission (encapsulation) and from the Physical layer up to the Application layer during reception (decapsulation).






OSI Model – Data Flow 
Layer 7: Application (User Access Point)
What happens:
 This is where applications operate and users give commands. When you open a website, send a request, or upload a file, the request starts here using protocols like HTTP, HTTPS, FTP, or SMTP.
Data form: Raw data
Layer 6: Presentation (Data Formatter)
What happens:
 This layer prepares the data before transmission. It ensures the data is in the correct format, applies encryption for security, and compresses the data to reduce size.
Data form: Processed data
Layer 5: Session (Connection Controller)
What happens:
 Manages the communication session between two systems. It establishes the connection, keeps track of active communication, and closes the session once data exchange is complete.
Data form: Data
Layer 4: Transport (Traffic Regulator)
What happens:
 Controls end-to-end data delivery. It divides data into smaller units, assigns port numbers, and ensures reliable delivery using TCP or faster transmission using UDP.
Data form: Segments
Layer 3: Network (Route Planner)
What happens:
 Determines where the data should go next by examining IP addresses. Routers operate here to select the most efficient route to the destination.
Data form: Packets


Layer 2: Data Link (Local Delivery Handler)
What happens:
 Handles communication between devices on the same network. It adds MAC addresses, organizes packets into frames, and detects transmission errors.
Data form: Frames
Layer 1: Physical (Signal Carrier)
What happens:
 Transmits raw bits as electrical signals, light pulses, or radio waves through cables, fiber optics, or wireless media.
Data form: Bits




4. What is the difference between the TCP and UDP protocol?




Feature
	TCP (Transmission Control Protocol)
	UDP (User Datagram Protocol)


	Connection Type
	Connection-oriented
	Connectionless
	Reliability
	Guarantees delivery
	No delivery guarantee
	Data Order
	Packets arrive in order
	Packets may arrive out of order
	Error Handling
	Detects & retransmits lost data
	No retransmission
	Flow Control
	Yes
	No
	Speed
	Slower (more overhead)
	Faster (less overhead)
	Handshake
	3-way handshake required
	No handshake
	Data Unit
	Segment
	Datagram
	Use Cases
	Web (HTTPS), SSH, FTP, Email
	Streaming, DNS, VoIP, Gaming
	

	

	

	

5. How can one decide which protocol to use ?
The choice between TCP and UDP depends on application requirements. TCP is used when reliable, ordered, and error-free data delivery is required, such as web applications and file transfers. UDP is chosen when low latency and speed are more important than reliability, such as in video streaming, online gaming, and DNS.


6.  write the basic connecting networking commands operate at  layer-3?
Layer 3 (Network Layer) commands include ping, traceroute, ip, route, and netstat.
These commands work with IP addresses and routing.
ping checks reachability using ICMP.
traceroute shows the path packets take across networks.
ip and route display and manage routing information.


7. What are the commands which give the info about the ports and connection?
netstat -tunlp
A classic command to view active network connections and ports.
* -t : Show TCP connections

* -u : Show UDP connections

* -n : Display IP addresses and port numbers (no DNS lookup)

* -l : Show listening ports only

* -p : Display the program/process using the port
ss -tunlp
A faster and modern replacement for netstat.
   * -t : TCP sockets

   * -u : UDP sockets

   * -n : Numeric addresses

   * -l : Listening sockets

   * -p : Process using the socket
lsof -i
Shows which process is using network ports.
      * -i : List network connections

      * -i :80 : Show process using port 80

      * -i tcp : Show TCP connections

      * -i udp : Show UDP connections
nmap
Used to scan open ports on a host.
         * Scans which ports are open/closed

         * Helps in security checks and troubleshooting
            8. What are the dns troubleshooting commands in linux ?


            * dig: The professional way to look up DNS records. It tells you exactly what the "Address Book" of the internet says about a domain.
            * Example: dig google.com


            * nslookup: A simpler, older tool to find the IP address of a domain name.


            9. what are the commands used for getting all the network  
    Interfaces?


            * ip addr (Modern Linux) / ifconfig (Old Linux): Shows your IP address, MAC address, and whether your network card is actually "Up."
            * ip link: Focuses specifically on the physical/hardware status of your network cards.
            * ip neigh / arp -a: Shows the ARP Table  (the list of local neighbors and their MAC addresses).